= ffi-ncurses

Author: Sean O'Halpin

A pure-ruby wrapper for ncursesw 5.x using the ffi library.

All of the core ncursesw functions are supported along with the Panel
library. The main things left to do are support for the Menu and Form
libraries.

The API is a transliteration of the C API rather than an attempt to
provide an idiomatic Ruby object-oriented API. The intent is to
provide a 'close to the metal' wrapper around the ncurses library upon
which you can build your own abstractions.

Having said that, this release also includes a wrapper that emulates
the existing Ncurses API. To use it, substitute

  require 'ffi-ncurses/ncurses'

for

  require 'ncurses'

or create a file called 'ncurses.rb' on your load path ($:) that
requires +ffi-ncurses/ncurses.rb+.

One benefit of this approach is that you can use existing examples and
man pages to find out how to use the library. Start with

  $ man ncurses

Below you'll find some very preliminary notes on usage. See the
examples directory for real working examples, which among other things
show how to input and output UTF-8, deal with pointers and handle wide
characters.

This version of ffi-ncurses defaults to loading ncursesw, the 'wide
character' version which supports UTF-8 and double width characters.

Tested on Ubuntu 10.04 with ruby1.8.7 and 1.9.2 using ffi (>= 0.6.3)
and JRuby 1.6.4 (head). A previous version of the library was tested
on Mac OS X 10.04. Please let me know if anything has stopped working.

Rubinius is not supported as its FFI does not provide the required
API, especially for dealing with buffers and pointers.

This is still very much a work-in-progress, so expect some rough edges
(and please report them). Having said that, you can do quite a lot
with it as it is.

== Install

  $ [sudo] gem install ffi-ncurses

== Usage

Load the library with:

  require 'ffi-ncurses'

FFI::NCurses methods can be called as module methods:

  begin
    stdscr = FFI::NCurses.initscr
    FFI::NCurses.clear
    FFI::NCurses.addstr("Hello world!")
    FFI::NCurses.refresh
    FFI::NCurses.getch
  ensure
    FFI::NCurses.endwin
  end

or as included methods:

  require 'ffi-ncurses'
  include FFI::NCurses
  begin
    initscr
    cbreak
    noecho
    curs_set 0
    clear
    move 10, 10
    standout
    addstr("Hi!")
    standend
    refresh
    getch
  ensure
    endwin
  end

== Set up screen

  require 'ffi-ncurses'

  FFI::NCurses.initscr
  begin
    ...
  ensure
    FFI::NCurses.endwin
  end

== Typical initialization

  stdscr = FFI::NCurses.initscr
  FFI::NCurses.start_color
  FFI::NCurses.curs_set 0
  FFI::NCurses.raw
  FFI::NCurses.noecho
  FFI::NCurses.keypad(stdscr, true)

== Colours

  start_color
  init_pair(1, FFI::NCurses::COLOR_BLACK, FFI::NCurses::COLOR_RED)
  attr_set FFI::NCurses::A_NORMAL, 1, nil
  addch("A"[0].ord) # works in both 1.8.7 and 1.9.x
  addch("Z"[0].ord | COLOR_PAIR(1))

== Cursor

=== Turn cursor off

  FFI::NCurses.curs_set 0

=== Turn cursor on

  FFI::NCurses.curs_set 1

== Windows

  require 'ffi-ncurses'
  include FFI::NCurses
  begin
    initscr
    win = newwin(6, 12, 15, 15)
    box(win, 0, 0)
    inner_win = newwin(4, 10, 16, 16)
    waddstr(inner_win, (["Hello!"] * 5).join(' '))
    wrefresh(win)
    wrefresh(inner_win)
    ch = wgetch(inner_win)
    delwin(win)

  rescue => e
    FFI::NCurses.endwin
    raise
  ensure
    FFI::NCurses.endwin
  end

== Mouse handling

NOTE: In previous versions of ffi-ncurses, the ncurses mouse API was
included separately. You now no longer need to +require 'ffi-ncurses/mouse'+ to get mouse support.

To use the mouse with ffi-ncurses, you first need to specify that you
want keypad translation with:

  keypad stdscr, true

otherwise your program will receive the raw mouse escape codes,
instead of +KEY_MOUSE+ mouse event codes.

Specify which events you want to handle with:

    mousemask(ALL_MOUSE_EVENTS | REPORT_MOUSE_POSITION, nil)

and set up a mouse event structure to receive the returned values:

    mouse_event = FFI::NCurses::MEVENT.new

Receiving mouse events is a two-stage process: first, you are notified
that a mouse event has taken place through a special key code, then
you retrieve the event using +getmouse+. For example:

      ch = getch
      case ch
      when FFI::NCurses::KEY_MOUSE
        if getmouse(mouse_event) == FFI::NCurses::OK

The mouse event contains the button state (+bstate+) and x, y
coordinates. You can test for the button state using:

  if mouse_event[:bstate] & FFI::NCurses::BUTTON1_PRESSED

or

  if FFI::NCurses.BUTTON_PRESS(mouse_event[:bstate], 1)

The possible button states are: PRESS, RELEASE, CLICK, DOUBLE_CLICK
and TRIPLE_CLICK.

== Specifying which curses library to use

You can specify which variant of curses you want to use by setting the
environment variable +RUBY_FFI_NCURSES_LIB+ to the one you want. For
example, to use the PDCurses X11 curses lib, use:

  RUBY_FFI_NCURSES_LIB=XCurses ruby examples/example.rb

You could also use this to specify +ncursesw-dbg+ for example to get
access to the +trace+ functions.

= TO DO

== Tests

This is tricky - I'm not sure exactly how to properly test a wrapper
for a library like ncurses. I certainly don't want to test ncurses!
Instead, I want to ensure my wrapper faithfully reproduces the
functionality of the platform's ncurses lib. To that end, I'm
experimenting with a simple DSL to generate both C and Ruby versions
of a test. With that I can generate equivalent programs and compare
the output. However, this is not really ready for prime time yet.

== Tidy up internals and examples

Things got a bit messy as I switched between the Linux and Mac
versions. The examples should be more focussed.

= Trivia

While researching ncurses on Google, I innocently entered "curses
getsx" as a search term. NSFW and definitely not one for "I'm Feeling
Lucky".

= Credits

Thanks to rahul and manveru for their support!


